It is, therefore,  necessary to determine for any given cement the water content of the paste which will  produce the desired consistence.
A convenient division of water in the hydrated cement, necessary for investigation  purposes, though rather arbitrary, is into two categories: evaporable and non-evaporable.
On the other hand, a surface area as high as that of cement  gel is not a necessary condition for high strength development, as high-pressure steam-cured  cement paste, which
The  importance of eliminating continuous capillaries is such that this might be regarded a  necessary c
f	0.08 by weight, but clearly considerable pressure is necessary to obtain a properly  consolidated mix of such proportions.
in the fineness of the cement particles, and  for a rapid development of strength high fineness is necessary (see Fig.
This is  necessary, as cold powder fed direct into a kiln would not permit the air flow and  exchange of heat necessary for the chemical reactions of formation of cement clinker.
tions necessary for the formation of strongly cementitious compounds took place.
This cement was prepared by heating a mixture of finely-divided clay and  hard limestone in a furnace until CO2 had been driven off; this temperature was much  lower than that necessary for clinkering.
tion of workability is related to the amount  of useful internal work necessary to produce full compaction.
It should be appreciated that  the necessary work again depends on the nature of the section being cast.
in placing of shotcrete is therefore necessary, and the use of large  reinforcement is undesirable.
Also, the necessary equipment and mode of placing are more expensive than in the  case of conventional concrete.
se of  numerous practical difficulties considerable skill and experience in application of the  process are necessary for good results to be obtained.
The reduced shrinkage is due to the point-to-point  contact of the coarse aggregate particles, without a clearance for the cement paste  necessary in ordinary concrete.
Preplaced aggregate concrete is economical in cement, as little as 120 to 150 kg per cubic  metre (200 to 250 lb / yd3) of concrete being used, but the strength of the resultant  concrete is limited by the high water / cement ratio necessary for a sufficient plasticity of  mortar; typical strength is 20 MPa (2900 psi)
Here, many of the techniques used with mass concrete are inapplicable because a  medium or high-strength mix is required, early strength may be necessary, and embedding  pipework may not be permitted.
are believed to be the minima necessary for  compaction, but with these values a long period of vibration may be necessary.
An immersion vibrator will not expel air from the form boundary so  that "slicing" along the form by means of a flat plate on edge is necessary.
100 ASTM) sieve is necessary to achieve the fine  sieve effect.
On the other hand, when the cement content of the mix is  high, a high content of fines is also necessary in order to increase the  surface area and to increase friction.
and,  because in this case uniformity is more difficult to achieve, particular care  and effort are necessary.
With some drum mixers, however, when a very dry mix is used, it is  necessary to feed first some water and the coarse aggregate, as otherwise  its surface does not become sufficiently wetted.
ortant to know what is the minimum mixing time  necessary to produce a concrete uniform in composition and, as a result, of  satisfactory strength.
Experience is clearly necessary but, once it has been acquired, the "by  eye" test, particularly for the purpose of checking uniformity, is both rapid and reliable.
For very dry mixes a considerable effort may be necessary.
Compacting Factor Test    There is no generally accepted method of directly measuring workability, i.e. the amount  of work necessary to achieve full compaction.
The last qualification is necessary because of some secondary effects: a lower  aggregate / cement ratio means a higher total surface area of solids (aggregate and  cement) so that the same amount of water results in a somewhat decreased workability.
Since only the internal friction is an intrinsic property of the mix,  workability can be best defined as the amount of useful internal work necessary to produce  full compaction.
To obtain such a definition it is necessary to consider what happens when  concrete is being compacted.
The test is again evaluated by  observation only, and if necessary an actual field test in which a 2 m2 (or 20 ft2) slab  is cured may b performed.
dent of  the applied stress level or of the number of cycles necessary to produce failure.
r must be of the  pressure vessel type with a supply of wet steam; excess water is necessary as  superheated steam must not be allowed to come into contact with the concrete.
As the concrete is at that time mechanically weak it is necessary  to suspend a covering above the concrete surfac
Water taken up by dry cement exposed for six months to different vapour pressures     It must be stressed that for a satisfactory development of strength it is not necessary  for all t
It is necessary to know also the stress distribution in a volume suff
In unsegregated concrete, voids are distributed in a  random manner, a condition necessary for the application of Griffith's hypothesis.
Care is therefore necessary in translating laboratory results into mix proportions to be  used on a site and all reference to water / cement ratio must make it clear if total rather than effective  water is considered.
ce of the water / cement ratio on strength does not truly constitute a law as the  water / cement ratio rule does not include many  qualifications necessary for its validity.
Figure 12.5 A classification of aggregates used for making concrete    Heavyweight aggregate    Heavyweight aggregates provide an effective and economical use of concrete for radiation shielding,  by giving the necessary protection against X-rays, gamma-rays and neutrons, and for weight co
e high proportion of aluminate, about 40 per cent,  brings about an exceptionally high early strength and consequently it often becomes necessary to keep  concrete, in which this cement is used, continuously wet for at least 24 hours to avoid damage from  the associated heat of hydration.
Great care is  necessary in using retarders as in incorrect quantities th  ey can totally inhibit the  setting and hardening of concrete.
In view of the above rules, it is necessary to determine the chloride content even of those  admixtures in which calcium chloride is only a minor component.
The relation between the time necessary for one-half of the CAH10 to convert  and the temperature of storage of 13 mm (1/2 in.)
Nevertheless, further improvements in the cements are necessary before they can be more  widely employed.
Very careful proportioning of the cement  ingredients is necessary in order to obtain the desired expansion.
Because of this, white cement concrete is often used in the form of a facing placed against ordinary  concrete backing, but great care is necessary to ensure full bond between the two concretes.
placement of  cement is necessary.
For  instance, when fly ash is used in lean mixes, almost 100 kg (220 lb)  pozzolana may be necessary to replace 50 kg (110 lb) of cement, but the amount of pozzolana is  lower in rich mixes.
is necessary to limit  the rate of heat evolution of the cement used in this type of structure: a greater proportion of the heat  can then be dissipated and a lower rise in temperature results.
For this reason a balance of requirements may be necessary, and the economic  aspect of manufacture must a
es of any material is necessary if a  satisfactory end product is to be obtained and concrete, in this respect, is no different from  other materials.
logy, it is  necessary that several readings are taken and the average value used.
s necessary for the alkali - silica reaction and increased temperatures accelerate  this reaction.
Where necessary, the critical areas  may be lined with materials having greater resistance to cavitation erosion.
estimate of their effect on concrete strength  in individual circumstances it is necessary to carry out trial mixes.
are is necessary to avoid breakage of the aggregate: particles greater than 40 mm (or  1 1/2 in.)
A description of the precautions necessary in handling operations is outside the scope of  this book, but one vital recommendation should be mentioned: coarse aggregate should be  split into size fractions 5 to 10, 10 to 20, 20 to 4
The term continuously graded is used to describe conventional  grading when it is necessary to d
At the other extreme, the coarse sand of zone 1 produces a harsh mix, and a high sand  content may be necessary for higher workability.
blending of two or more sands is  necessary.
Such a  grading is comparatively workable and can, therefore, be used  for mixes with a low  water / cement ratio or for rich mixes; it is, however, necessary to make sure that  segregation does not
ing the desired aggregate grading are:  the surface area of the aggregate, which determines the amount of water necessary to wet  all the solids; the relative volume occupied by the aggregate; the workability of the mix;  and the tendency to segregation.
As, however, the development of strength  corresponding to a given water / cement ratio requires full compaction, and this can be  achieved only with a sufficiently workable mix, it is necessary to produce a mix that can be  compacted to a maximum density with a reasonable amount of work.
None the less, care is necessary in  order to make sure that no sieve is overloa
he expansion is due to moisture uptake by the previously unwetted clay, the  de-dolomitization being necessary only to provide access of moisture to the locked-in  clay; another is that clay increases the reactivity of the aggregate so that dolomite and  calcium silicate hydrate produce Mg(OH)2, silica gel, and calcium carbonate with a  volume inc
Moisture is necessary and the reaction is accelerated under conditions of alternating  wetting and drying.
ew of the above, it is necessary to control the clay, silt and fine dust contents of  aggregate.
Even when they are in the  latter form, silt and fine dust should not be present in excessive quantities because, owing  to their fineness and therefore large surface area, silt and fine dust increase the amount of  water necessary to wet all the particles in the mix.
reliminary assessment of suitability of aggregates: If no colour change in excess of that  specified is observed, no further tests are necessary unless contamination with industrial  affluence has occurred.
For this  reason, further tests are necessary: concrete cubes are made using the suspected  aggregates and their strength is compared with concrete of the same mix proportion but  made with aggregates of known quality.
he  mixture is vigorously shaken to allow the intimate contact necessary for chemical action,  and then left to stand for 24 hours, when the organic content can be judged by the colour  of the solution: the greater the organic content the darker the colour.
ockpiles is necessary: storing in  horizontal layers, having at least two stockpiles and allowing each pile to  drain before  use, and not using the bottom 300 mm (12 in.)
Care is necessary to avoid over-drying: the sand should be brought to a just  free-flowing condition, and must not be heated further.
en dry aggregate is used the particles  become quickly coated with cement paste which prevents further ingress of water  necessary for saturation.
When aggregate is to be actually batched by volume  it is necessary to know the weight of aggregate that would fill a container of unit  volume.
This is the specific gravity most frequently and easily determined and necessary for  calculations of yield of con
However,  little is known about these phenomena, and relying on experience is still  necessary in predicting the bond between the aggregate
As closer size control is necessary, the sieves considered are not those of the standard  concrete aggregate series but: 75.0, 63.0, 50.0, 37.5, 28.0, 20.0, 14.0, 10.0, 6.30 an
At all  stages of reduction it is necessary to ensure that the representative character
