In particular, Powers suggested that the same products are formed at all stages of  hydration of the paste; this follows from the fact that for a given cement the surface area  of hydrated cement is

Since in the early stages of hydration the different compounds hydrate at different  rates, the rate of heat evolution, as well as the total heat, depends on the compound  composition of the cement.

This would  indicate that gel of similar properties is formed at all stages and that  continued hydration does not affect the products already in existence.

Diagrammatic representation of the volumetric proportions of cement paste  at different stages of hydration     Let us now consider the situation when the cement has hydrated fully.

Composition of cement paste at different stages of hydration     As a more

In practice, the terms initial set and final set are used to describe arbitrarily chosen  stages of setting.

It is important  that the constituent materials remain uniformly distributed within the concrete mass  during the various stages of its handling and that full compaction is achieved.

 concrete is produced in two stages.

Owing to the influence of temperature during the early stages of hardening on the later  strength, a compromise between the temperatures giving a high early and a high late  strength has to be made.

rature of concrete (at an air temperature of 4.5 C  (40 F)) on the loss of water from concrete in the early stages after placing (relative  humidity of air 100 per cent, wind velocity 4.5 m / s (10 mph))      Methods of Curing    No more than an outline of the different means of curing will be given here  as the actual procedures used vary widely

the loss of water from  concrete in the early stages after placing (relative humidity of air 70 per cent; wind  velocity 4.5 m / s (10 mph))     Fig.

Influence of wind velocity on the loss of water from concrete in the early  stages after placing (relative humidity of air 70 per cent, temperature 21 C (70 F))    Fig.

Influence of relative humidity of air on the loss of water from  concrete in  the early stages after placing (air temperature 21 C (70 F); wind velocity 4.5 m / s (10 mph))    Fig.

itable environment during the early stages of hardening.

False set is  thought to be the result of intergrinding gypsum with very hot clinker in the initial stages of the  manufac

In the early stages of hydration, while in its plastic stage, cement mortar gives to  the fresh concrete its cohesive properties.

effect of dispersion is to expose a greater surface area of cement to hydration,  which progresses therefore at a higher rate in the early stages.

es of cements of different types are found only  in the earlier stages of hydration in well-hydrated pastes the differences are only minor.

ype of cement used has no effect  although during the very early stages of hydration the use of a cement with a high rate of hydration  can be beneficial.

These various stages are shown  diagrammatically in Fig.

In order to find the compacted or rodded bulk density, the  container is filled in three stages, each third of the volume being tamped a  p

This is so  because, having been crushed before the full load of 400 kN (40 tons) has been applied,  these weaker materials become compacted so that the amount of crushing during later  stages of th

At all  stages of reduction it is necessary to ensure that the representative character
